Magic in 1001 easy lessons.

Magic on Andor is a complex subject, taking a little time to 
understand and a lot to master. I've put together some notes 
answering the questions I'm most commonly asked about the use 
of spells below. I don't claim it's complete, but I hope that 
it's of use...
 
Ilhana Loereili D'Chessenta, known as Ashimi
Elder of the Silver Arcana

[It also hasn't yet been edited, so please ignore 
transcription errors.]

---------------------------------------------------------------

Part One: Introduction
 
I. The choice of your primary spells depends on style and 
preference. Any mage who does not have a strong non-magic 
skill (bow, melee weapon, psi) will eventually need at least 
two heavily mastered spells with which to hunt. Contrary to 
rumor, they need not be in conjuration.
  
II. Flexibility among schools is useful, but not an utter 
necessity. It is possible, by harvesting or buying herbs, to 
forego necromancy entirely. Druidic is a useful school, but 
nice rather than a necessity. Enchantment is more difficult to 
ignore, as eventually one either needs more defense than is 
easily possible or the spells "Wizard's Armor", "Haste", 
"Slow" and "Flight" to easily survive more difficult areas, 
but it can be done. Conjuration can be foregone entirely, but 
is has the most useful offensive and defensive array of spells 
possible. It is better to be good in your school of choice 
than knowledgeable, but not concentrated, in all of them.

III. The Schools

        A. Conjuration: A school strong on offensive and 
        defensive spells, containing all the basic elemental
        attacks and the ability to summon guardians 
        (elementals).

        B. Enchantment: An "enhancing" school containing 
        spells that make transportation, hand-to-hand fighting 
        and life easier. Can be used for defense against 
        non-physical attacks and in emergencies, escape.

        C. Necromancy: A school of both healing and 
        destruction, necromancy's offensive capabilities are 
        strongly underrated at the time I write this. 

        D. Druidic: A school that provides protection against 
        the vaugaries of the elements, tools to free oneself 
        from those who would trap you, some defense and a 
        great deal of aid to those who use a bow. 

IV. Mastery - "Mastering" a spell is the process of studying a 
spell closely in order to learn its ins and outs. The cost is 
8 builds for the first rank of mastery and 4 for each 
additional rank. 

Any mastery reduces casting time from three seconds to two. 
Mana cost is lessened by two for each rank of mastery down to 
a minimum of half the original cost of the spell, rounded 
down. Damage, on offensive spells, is increased by around 1.5 
points per rank. 

"Minimum mastery" is when you have a spell mastered enough 
times for minimum mana cost (E.g., Freezing Sphere, a 9th rank 
spell, is minimally mastered at 3 ranks to a cost of 4 mana.) 
"Full mastery" is when you have mastered a spell to the 
maximum extent allowed - the level of the spell + one. (E.g., 
Freezing Sphere, mastered 10 times.)    
           
Part Two: Offense
  
I. After a certain point (early on, yet) the key to 
effective use of magic is mastery. The spells first mastered 
should be offensive. A list of the most useful candidates 
follows:

Conjuration     Enchantment     Necromancy      Druidic

Force Blade     Dancing Sword   Spectral Fist   Earth Spike
                                Spectral Sword       
 
Lightning Bolt                  Destroy Undead II
Freezing Sphere                 Destroy Undead III
Flaming Sphere                  Body Destruction III

Flaming Arrows 

Whatever your school of choice, pick a low-mana, high-utility 
spell (force blade, spectral fist, earth spike) early on and 
fully master it. The result will be a weapon that is low cost 
- one or two mana - that does a decent amount (usually 
3-24/3-30) of damage. Start on this as soon as you get 12 
spellcraft. 
  
Other spells can be mastered to whatever degree you prefer - 
there are advantages to having minimum mastery (defined as 
"enough mastery to cut the mana cost in half") of several 
spells, especially if you like being able to move around. But 
having one or two fully mastered spells can make for 
impressive results in your chosen hunting areas. 
  
II. Some examples of workable mastery combinations:
 
Force Blade & Freezing Sphere - although a fire weapon is 
useful, full mastery of both of these spells will "take care 
of you" through most on Andor. It's the basic conjurer's 
toolkit, and incredibly useful in the mid-level mages 
playground - the wastes.
 
Lightning Bolt & Force Blade
                 Earth Spike
                 Destroy Undead

Lightning Bolt is a spell that must be fully mastered to get 
any appreciable effect on creatures not suspectible to 
electricity. However, you can "work through" to those as 
several of the low-to-mid level creatures, such as those in 
the Swamp and Ursine Magi, light up quite nicely. At upper 
levels, it is a very useful spell on the Astral Planes: 
rollers, robots, terminators and fleshblighters all react to 
it quite well. It is entirely possible to hunt the wastes with 
lightning, although not quite spectacularly as someone with 
heavily-mastered freezing sphere. 
 
I list it with Earth Spike because it's a good style of spell 
to combine with druidic magic. "Call Lightning" is both 
expensive and rarely used as it requires being outdoors in a 
heavy rain. 
 
Destroy Undead & Earth Spike - Necromancy and Druidic are a 
popular combination. These two spells give a nice basic weapon 
against non-undead, and an extremely powerful one against one 
of the most common enemies of life on and off Andor. There are 
several advantages to Destroy Undead, including the fact that 
there is no such thing as a "hand shot" when you are attacking 
their very essence and the fact backfires won't hurt you 
unless you're a vampire. The second rank is worth mastering, 
but if you are a serious necromancer I recommend only getting 
the minimum mastery - fully mastered DUIII is a deadly weapon 
and worth waiting for. 
  
Destroy Undead & Spectral Fist & Spectral Sword - For the pure 
necromancer, the answer to "how do I do it?" is "Master 
everything." Spectral fist will blast your way through greater 
skeletons and the lesser live creatures of Andor, if you're 
patient, while Spectral Sword fully mastered will give you a 
mid-cost solution to the "live opponent" woes. 
  
Dancing Sword - I do not recommend pure enchantment to anyone. 
Period. But if you must, fully master Dancing Sword 
immediately. It will be your only weapon, and it is a useful 
one.
 
Force Blade & Lightning Bolt & Freezing Sphere & Flaming 
Sphere - the four basic weapons of the conjurer, these spells 
will get you through anything, anywhere.
 
Upper level mastery for a conjurer usually includes flaming 
arrows (for those pesky Underkeep deizens), a druid who hunts 
the planes might play with Call Lightning if his hunting 
partners don't object to rusting weapons. A necromancer just 
keeps adding in ranks to the Destroy Undead spell, in rotation 
with other skills he or she wants.
 
III. Weaknesses and Immunities
 
"Blade" spells usually work well on all creatures except the 
following: Skeletons, bone golems, undead heads. There are few 
creatures suspectible to blades, but the bleeding induced can 
be useful. 

"Crushing" spells work best on skeletal creatures: skeletons, 
bone golems.
  
Cold does not work on lesser undead: skeletons, ghouls, 
greater ghouls, banshees (?), etc. Greater undead, such as 
military ghouls, spectral lords and gnomen, are vunerable to 
it. Cold creatures, such as frigils, rollers and so on, are 
nearly invunerable to it. So are fleshblighters and the 
occasional demon. Military ghouls, mechanical opponents (such 
as robots and terminators), fire giants, sandmen, mounds and 
stalkers all seem especially susceptible to chill.
 
Lightning is deadly to creatures of the Swamp, ursine 
magicans, the creatures on the ice-world Xertaatal, robots and 
terminators and scattered other creatures. Gnomen necromancers 
are immune to lightning, but it usually does normal or 
slightly reduced damage on almost anything else.
 
Fire works well on sharkor, frost giants, spectral lords, 
gnomen necromancers, storm giants, the Darkoth and a few other 
creatures. Chaos demons are often immune to heat, as are 
astral stalkers.
   
Destroy Undead does NOT work on demons (obvious ones or less 
obvious ones such as gnomen necromancers) or magical 
constructs (bone golems.)
 
Part Three: Defense
 
There are two ways to approach defense as a spellcaster: you 
can rely upon guards or upon yourself. The first is by far the 
most popular and less costly approach. However, the second is 
occasionally necessary.
 
I. Defending yourself

Defensive spells are available in every school but 
enchantment. They are:
 
Mystic Armor (Conjuration, 5th rank) - +20 to defense. 
Carapace (Druidic, 8th rank) - +20 to defense, caster only.
Spectral Shield (Necromacy, 9th rank) - +20 to defense.
Prismatic Globe (Conjuration, 15th rank) - +50 to defense.
Mass Protection (Conjuration, 23rd rank) - +25 to caster, +20 to 
all joined.
Prismatic Globe II (Conjuration, 30th rank) +100 to defense.
 
However, the maximum defense with all spells and the 
occasional defensive item will not protect a mage from any of 
the more dangerous creatures in the Realms. The choice is 
usually between learning other skills (psi or dodge) to 
increase your defenses or working with a guard.

II. Guards
 
Guards are available in four varietes: summoned, controlled, 
dominated or live.
 
Live is when you team with a psionic or fighter and let them 
take the damage. It is most useful (and appreciated) when you 
trade either defensive or healing spells for this service. 
They usually make better conversationalists than the other 
three varieties.
 
Conjurers can SUMMON an elemental guard at 12th rank. The 
material components for these four spells are gemstones: 
garnet (fire), tourmaline stone (earth), aquamarine (water) 
and opal (air). An elemental will prevent all hand to hand 
attacks by creatures employing non-magical weapons. Polearms, 
spells and special attacks are another matter. Magical weapons 
will kill an elemental, but you only encounter those at higher 
levels (Skull House, the Black Towers.) High level conjurers 
can use Tinderath's Chaotic Summons to get something 
equivalent to, but better looking than, an elemental.
 
Enchanters can DOMINATE a creature to serve as guard. Lesser 
werewolves from Grymwood are the best low-level guards, as 
they have an immunity to non-magical weapons and are as 
effective as elementals. There is the drawback of needing to 
get your guard out of the area you're in - in winter, that's 
quite a task. Bend Space II, at 24th rank, solves the problem, 
but until then, be prepared to find your guard where you fight.
At higher levels, dominating a creature that's harder to hit 
than the one that's hitting is the way to get around the fact 
magical weapons WILL hit. A mantico with several protective 
spells will serve as an effective guard in the Black Tower, 
for example. Domination I is based on total body points - if 
you're careful not to use a spell that induces bleeding, you 
can beat a creature up until it will work. Domination II is 
far more effective.
   
Necromancers can CONTROL undead. The drawback is that many 
people consider it black magic. It's illegal in the city. 
However, if the control is only for the purpose of a guard, it 
can be considered a grey area - just make sure whoever sees 
you thinks so too. Phantom caretakers are the working 
equivalent of lesser werewolves. Spectral Lords and 
highly-spelled gnomen would work similarly to the mantico 
described above. Jolly Rogers are handy guards in Haven. 
Control Undead is NOT based on body points, and beating a 
spectral lord until it's laying on the floor still will not 
allow Control Undead I or II to work. Black or grey 
necromancers of 17th rank can SUMMON a greater wight, using 
wight dust skinned from a lesser. These are ugly elementals. 
Extremely skilled white necromancers have recourse to Spectral 
Warriors at 32nd rank.
 
Druids are out of luck. Vipers are cute, but a rat could chew 
them to bits.
 
III. Using a guard 

When you are attacked by something that doesn't use a polearm, 
simply command them to guard you. Polearm users can be 
distracted (only one at a time, though, so be careful) by 
commanding the elemental to slay the creature causing the 
problem.

If your guard or familar is slain, you end up stunned. Be 
careful of this.
         
Part Four: Spells More Useful than They Seem 
 
I. Haste and Slow
 
These two spells, at the 5th rank of enchantment, are probably 
the most useful in the books. HASTING a fighter turns him into 
a killing machine, although he will soon be exhausted. For a 
mage, haste is less useful because it cancels out mastery. But 
as many creatures SLOW you throughout your adventuring career, 
some ability to haste (whether a gallon of potion or the 
spell) becomes a necessity. 

However, the most useful application of SLOW is against 
special attacks. Worm spit, mantico tails, robotic bullets and 
so on can soon reduce the most able mage to a burned, bleeding 
mess. Slow gives you the time to kill them first.
 
II. Wizard's Armor and Silence
 
Sooner or later, things will hit you. Polearms are 
unavoidable. This spell stops your spells from being 
disrupted, or lost, when you are hit. Silence keeps a mage 
from incanting a spell, and is useless against higher level 
magic-using creatures (necromancers, rakashka, etc.) that 
depend on hand movements or symbols. It is, however, very 
handy when a sorcerous assassin comes after you.
 
III. Flight, Bend Space and Tree Door
 
A flight item (potion, wand, ring, etc.) or the ablitity to 
cast the spell becomes a necessity once you begin exploring 
outside of Fayd. Without 10 ranks of climbing, getting into 
the Deep Realms or up into the Wastes without flight is a 
deadly or at least bruising proposition. Even the bridge to 
Elemental Giants (and the walk to Mirdaal) is a difficulty - 
if you're carrying too much weight, you have to fly over the 
bridge rather than walk. Flying is also a lot more convenient.
 
Bend Space is a teleportation spell, and the reason most mages 
get lost the minute you ask them to go someplace unfamiliar. 
It's faster than flying, but doesn't work in the grasslands, 
Deep Realms or from the main land mass to the various islands. 
(Haven, Crescent, Volcanic.)
 
Tree Door is effectively a "one way" teleportation spell for 
druids. It only works where there is a tree to enter into, and 
is very picky about which tree works. (Right outside of town 
works, the uquart groves, the silver tree at Mirdaal, the 
Hanging Tree in the Wastes and many others do not.) However, 
you can (for example) get back from Mirdaal and the Wastes by 
foot - and there is a tree along the grassland path on the 
wastes - even though getting to them is much more difficult. 
Handy.
 
IV. Body Restoration I
 
One rank of necromancy can be a very solid investment. The 
first rank of body restoration (often used hasted to speed up 
the process) is both lighter than babich root and easier to 
use. The higher ranks of healing contain cure poison and 
disease and BRIII... however, BRIII is so costly that it is 
only really efficent if mastered or if you're fighting 
creatures that can inflict frequent, massive damage. 
 
V. Cold Shield, Heat Shield and Freedom
 
These are the three most useful spells in druidic magic. Cold 
shield halves damage from heat, heat shield halves damage from 
cold and freedom frees you from plant snare, webs, insect 
swarms and tentacles. The protection offered allows you to 
fight for far more time with less risk of death.
  
VI. Mystic Key
 
Locked doors and chests are a pain. This magical "skeleton 
key" gives you the equivalent of 7 ranks of lockpicking, and 
opens most doors that are meant to be opened easily. (Mirdaal, 
Kvantar Tree, Keep gate, etc.)
 
VII. Spells useful to others...
 
Protection spells (see "Defense") for fighters and psis. 
Strength increases a fighter's damage and skill. Agility does 
the same for an archer, but most have recourse to a magical 
fountain that can provide the same result. Healing spells are 
useful to all, and invigoration can allow a fighter to keep 
chopping almost continually, or a psi to drain their fatigue 
endlessly.
 
Part Five: General Tips and Tricks

Submission - on occasion, you will need to cast an offensive 
spell upon yourself. To do so, SUBMIT and cast. Then 
immediately UNSUBMIT, or any hostile spellcaster can hit you 
at will.
 
If you are webbed or entangled in plants, insects or 
tentacles, there are several ways to get out.
 
        1. Cast Freedom
        2. Submit and cast "Dispel Lesser Magic." WARNING: You 
        will lose a spell randomly at each cast. It may not be 
        the web. 
        3. Cast slime or mist form. (It is recommended you 
        haste yourself first as transforming back takes a long 
        time and you will be vunerable during it.) Wolflings 
        can transform out of them as well.
        4. If the spell is damaging, but you are not otherwise 
        at risk, submit and web yourself. This will get rid of 
        the insect swarm or tentacles, but you'll be caught in 
        your own web.

When fighting a creature (e.g., worms, gnomen) that take a 
long time to kill, you may want to alternate your low-mana 
spell (force blade, fist) with the more damaging high-mana 
ones (sphere, destroy undead). This will let you fight a bit 
longer between rests.
 
Using marks - Bends Space, Tree Door, Translocation and Scry 
all involve the use of "marks" - up to 10 areas a mage has 
studied and memorized. To mark a place, MARK 1 (or 2, through 
10.) To review your marks, type MARK. To cast a spell to or at 
a mark (to travel there or see what's going on) CAST <mark #>. 
E.g., to teleport to Bazaar Center:
 
First, type MARK 1 when you're in Center.
Second, walk somewhere and prepare bend space.
Third, CAST 1.               
                                                 
Try to always carry a healing root or mushroom, a maufra 
lichen and a rowik berry. There will be times you are badly 
injured, diseased or poisoned and out of mana and these will 
be lifesavers.                                    
                                
"Multi-target" spells are used this way. You TARGET up to nine 
creatures (for fire arrows, tentacles or lightning, four for 
translocation) and then CAST... either at the creature that 
can resist the least or at yourself. Creatures remain 
targeted until dead.
  
Some spells cancel each other out. They are:

1. Wizard's Armor  
   Spell Shield    
   Mass Protection                          

2. Weather Resistance
   Heat Shield            
   Cold Shield             
   Ride the Lightning                         

3. Repel Plants
   Repel Plants & Webs   
   Free Action

4. Night Vision
   Claws of the Elder Wolf                        

5. Divine Blessing
   True Aim

6. Prismatic Globe
   Prismatic Globe II

7. Cloak Mind
   Mindlink

8. Strength I
   Strength II
   Strength III

9. Agility I
   Agility II
   Agility III

If you're hunting with other people, take the time to figure 
out everyone's strengths and weaknesses and work together. 
Teaming up can be far more effective than simply rushing to 
kill first.                                        

When all else fails - ask around. If the person is busy, ask 
them if you can talk to them later, write them with your 
question or if they have suggestions as to who might be able 
to help you.                                                                                        

When mastering a spell with multiple ranks, it is almost 
always best to wait for the highest rank. Destroy Undead II 
for a pure necromancer or necromancer/druid is the primary 
exception, as minimum mastery will greatly help the mage get 
to the point where they can reach the third rank.  

Items or potions with the following spells are good emergency 
devices: flight, invisibility, haste, mist form. 
                                
Most protective or enhancing spells are cumulative - if you 
cast them several times, the duration of the spell is 
increased each time, to a maximum of 28 hours. There are a few 
spells that aren't: True Aim, Divine Blessing, Haste and Slow 
are the most commonly used ones. If you need to maintain them 
constantly, you can recast right before it runs out, it will 
"reset" the duration from the beginning.  

Wands and items are useable while silenced.

Knocking someone over and entangling them (it's safer to 
entangle first, knock second) will prevent almost every 
creature or person except a pure psi from being able to attack 
you. Some, not all, psionic creatures can attack while down. 
Tentacles & maelstorm, or web/snare and earthwave, are popular 
ways to accomplish this. Not all creatures are webbable, and 
insect swarm and plant snare only work in certain (limited) 
circumstances. Webbing and sleeping a creature will work as 
well, if they are vunerable to sleep. 
 
Stunning a psionic creature or person slows them down quite a 
bit.                 

Many of the longer-duration spells (globe, armor, carapace, 
etc.) seem to have a maximum duration of 20 minutes per cast, 
whether your spellcraft is 40 or 80.
 
Remember to have fun.

        
Part Six: Offensive & Defensive Spells by Category
                  
Offensive

Blade           Damage (Mastered)  School          Rank

Dancing Blade   Low (Low)          Enchantment     1 
Force Blade     Low (Medium)       Conjuration     3
Earth Spike     Low (Medium)       Druidic         5
Dancing Sword   Low (Medium)       Enchantment     6
Spectral Sword  Low (Medium)       Necromancy      3

Crushing

Spectral Fist   Low (Low/Medium)   Necromancy      3 
Call Meteor     High (Massive)     Conjuration     20
Heat
 
Flame Bolt      Low (Low)          Conjuration     1
Call Fire       Low/Medium(Medium) Conjuration     8
Flaming Sphere  Medium (High)      Conjuration     13
Flaming Arrows  Medium/Multiple    Conjuration     18
Rorin's Fire    High               Necromancy      17*
Call Meteor     High (Massive)     Conjuration     20

* Religion-specific spell
 
Cold
 
Ice Bolt        Low (Low)          Conjuration     3
Frost Ray       Low (Medium)       Conjuration     6
Freezing Sphere Medium (High)      Conjuration     9
 
Electricity
 
Shock Wave      Low (Low/Medium)   Conjuration     4
Lightning Bolt  Low (Medium)       Conjuration     7
Call Lightning  High (Massive)     Druidic         17
Call Thunder    High (Massive)     Conjuration     20
Chain Lightning Medium/Multiple    Conjuration     23
Ride the Lightning  Special        Druidic         24
Maelstorm       Special            Conjuration     31
 
Essence
 
Body Destruction
        I       Low (Low)          Necromancy      1
        II      Low/Medium(Medium) Necromancy      5   
        III     Medium/High (High  Necromancy      10
Wail of Banshee Medium/Multiple    Necromancy      ?
Wither Limb     Special            Necromancy      23
Contagion       Special            Necromancy      23
Poison          Special            Necromancy      20

Destroy Undead
        I       Low (Low)          Necromancy      3
        II      Low/Medium(Medium) Necromancy      8
        III     Medium/High (High) Necromancy      13

Entanglement    Notes              School         Rank

Plant Snare     Outdoors only      Druidic        4
Web             Three immobilize   Conjuration    10 
Wall of Thorns  Effectively useless Druidic       14
Imprison **     Special            Enchant        19
Creeping Death  Damaging snare     Druidic        22
Insect Swarm    Limited, damaging  Druidic        25
Syrix's Tentacles Multi-target     Conjuration    26
          
** Imprison puts the target in a blue force bubble, which 
prevents them from attacking or being attacked.
                                                    
Other Offensive

Earth Wave      Stuns, knocks down Druidic        12
Sunray          Stuns              Druidic        13
Maelstorm       Flattens, damages  Conjuration    31
Sleep I         Special            Enchantment    2
Sleep II                           Enchantment    6
Sleep III                          Enchantment    18
                       
Note: Sleep is based upon total body points of targets. If 
successful, the target is placed in a prone position and is 
unconscious either until next struck or until the spell wears 
off (a few seconds.) 
                  
Defensive       Effect             School         Rank 

Mystic Armor    +20 defense        Conjuration    5
Carpace         +20 defense, self  Druidic        8
Spectral Shield +20 defense        Necromancy     9
Prismatic Globe +50 defense        Conjuration    15
Globe II        +100 defense       Conjuration    30
 
Wizard's Armor  No spell disruption Enchantment   9
Spell Shield    +25 magic resistance Enchantment  14
Cloak Mind ***  +25 psi resistance** Enchantment  22

*** Cloak Mind also protects against sleep, charm, true name 
and other mind-affecting spells.

Resist Weather  Cancels rain penalty Druidic      3
Cold Shield     Halves heat damage  Druidic       6
Heat Shield     Halves cold damage  Druidic       7
Repel Plants    Stops Plant Snare   Druidic       10
Repel Plants&Web Stops Snare & Web  Druidic       18
Ride the Lightning Absorbs Electric Druidic       24
Free Action     Underwater Movement Druidic       20                                             
Dispel Magic    Removes Spell ****  General       5
Freedom         Removes Web/Snare   Druidic       9

**** The effect of Dispel Lesser Magic is random. "Good" spells 
may be cancelled before the offensive spell or sigil is removed.
 
Slime Form      Transformation      Enchantment   12
Mist Form       Transformation      Enchantment   24
 
Note: These two spells are not strictly defensive, but can be 
used to escape bonds (web, snare, tentacle, bonds of force, 
etc.) or to try to seep under doors. Slime takes greatly 
reduced damage from attacks, mist takes none. Mists can fly. 
Neither form can attack, defend or speak.
                                      
Disjunction     Special             Enchantement  21

Note: Disjunction dispels ALL spells active in the area. Do 
not use it casually. It is the only way (other than time) to 
get someone out of an Imprisonment bubble.

Part Seven: Other Spells                 
 
Guards (see Part Three)

                 School  Rank   Notes

Summon Elemental Conjure 12     (See Part Three)
Summon Gargoyle  Conjure 16     Requires diamond                            
Tinderath's    
Chaotic Summons  Conjure 28     Component varies

Command          Enchant 6      Extremely short domination.
Domination I     Enchant 12     
Domination II    Enchant 24

Control Undead I Necro   7      Skeletons, etc.            
              II Necro   13     Gnomen
             III Necro   21     Spectral Lords    
                                 
Summon Familar   Conjure 2      Brings an animal that can 
                                watch things for you.
Call Animal      Druidic 1      Ditto.
Stick to Snake   Druidic 5      Brings forth a viper. Outdoors.

Transportation

Tree Door        Druidic 10     See "Useful Spells"
Flight           Enchant 11     Allows flight    
Bend Space       Enchant 17     Teleportation 
Bend Space II    Enchant 23     Group Teleportation
Translocation    Enchant 29     Teleports up to four targets, 
                                the caster need not go along.

Healing
 
Body Restore I   Necro   1      Heals as babich root
             II  Necro   5      Heals as golden fruit
             III Necro   10     Heals as rioyng mushroom
Invigoration I   Necro   2      Restores fatigue
Invigoration II  Necro   9      Ditto
Reconstruction   Necro   4      Heals undead  
Unstun           Necro   9      Unstuns target
Cure poison      Necro   11     Cures poison *
Cure disease     Necro   12     Cures disease 
Breath of Life   Necro   14     Restores life
Regeneration     Necro   27     Restores a withered limb and 
                                speeds the natural healing 
                                process.

* Cure disease and poison will work on a dead target as well 
as a live one. This is prevents freshly-raised people from 
dying immediately after restoration.                

Weapons/Armor Enhancement

Enchant I       Enchant 4       +10 bonus to weapons/+5 to 
                                armor/shield/helm
Enchant II      Enchant 16      +20 weapons/+10 defensive 
"Ensorcelled"                    Requires a spider eye
Enchant III     Enchant 30      +30/+15 Requires an imp toe
"Eldritched"                    Of weapons, only bows will 
                                "hold" the eldritching. The 
                                others will lose the magic 
                                after a few hundred swings.                        

Recharge Wand   Enchant 26      Requires mandrake root. 

Create an Item  Enchant 31      Creates a wand or other magic 
                                item. This spell is severely 
                                draining and requires a diamond,
                                a storm and a blank wand.

Storm Blade     Conjure 24      Gives a non-magical blade 
Inferno Blade   Conjure 19      "critical" hits for a limited 
Winter Blade    Conjure 22      time.              

Personal Enhancement
 
Strength I      Enchant 4       These spells increase a weapon-
         II     Enchant 8       user's skill and damage. Also 
         III    Enchant 16      lets you carry more.
Agility I       Druidic 4       These do the same for a bow 
        II      Druidic 11      user. Also decreases the chance 
        III     Druidic 16      of weapon-breakage.
Diving Blessing Necro   9       Adds three ranks of weapon 
                                skill.
True Aim        Druidic 15      Adds 20 ranks of missile skill 
                                for 10 seconds.

Night Vision    Druidic 1       Lets you see in the dark. 

Claw Growth     Druidic 2       Self only. Grows claws.
Claws of the                                             
Elder Wolf      Druidic 21      Lets a claw user hit magical 
                                creatures.                     

Camoflauge      Druidic 9       Gives the equivalent of 10 
                                ranks of stealth, aids hiding.
                    
Mindlink        General 9       Activates telepathy.                   

Summonings

Sorcerous Summons I & II - these two spells summon an angry, 
uncontrollable demon. Overuse has deadly side effects, and 
being witnessed using them tends to bring them much more 
quickly.
                        
Animate Skeleton Necro  6       Brings forth a controlled
Animate Zombie  Necro   10      lesser undead.

Miscellaneous
 
Light           Conjure 1       Equivalent of a torch.

Mystic Key      Conjure 2       Simple skeleton key.

Analyze Ore     General 3       Tells an ore's purity.

Bloodsight      General 9       Purpose unknown.

Imprison Rune   Enchant 13      These "sigils" all are cast upon
Thunder Glyph   Conjure 10      an item, and attuned to the next
Inferno Glyph           20      person who touches them. If any 
Ice Glyph               15      other person handles that item,
Death Scythe    Necro   25      it will trigger the defense.

See Hidden      General  3      Allows you to see hidden and 
                                invisible creatures.
Dispel Invisibility "    6                          
                                                                
Aura Sense      General  14     Allows you to see creature's 
                                aura. From good to evil, it's: 
                                White, soft yellow, green, blue,
                                deep purple, absolute blackness. 
                                Blue is neutral.
                
Truename        General  18     Invasive spell tell's you the 
                                person's soulname, also works on 
                                sigils and controlled creatures.

Invisibility    Enchant  14     Allows you to remain invisible 
                                as long as you take no 
                                offensive action. 
Phantom Form    Enchant  34     Undispellable invisibility.
 
Pyrotechnics    Conjure  17     Fireworks display. 
                                Night/Outdoors. Requires 
                                beetle saliva.   

Call Storm      Druidic  21     Makes the weather worse.
Disperse Storm  Druidic  19     Makes the weather better.                                                     

Paranoia        Enchant  3      Practical joke spell.

Form Lock       Druidic  18     Locks target into their 
                                current form (human, slime, 
                                mist, wolf.)

Wolf Form       Druidic  28?    Rumored spell. Allows caster
                                to transform into a wolf.
 
Commune         Druidic  27     Allows caster to ask a question
With Nature                     of the forces of the earth. 
                                            

Appendix: Spell List (Current as of 8/6/94.)

Spell      Level      Name
-----      -----      ----
100        1          Flame Bolt
101        3          Force Blade
102        5          Mystic Armor
103        7          Lightning Bolt 
105        15         Globe of Protection
106        12         Summon Fire Elemental
107        12         Summon Air Elemental
108        12         Summon Water Elemental
109        16         Summon Gargoyle
112        20         Call Meteor
113        1          Light
114        2          Mystic Key
115        4          Shockwave
116        21         Thunder Call
117        8          Call Fire
118        13         Flaming Sphere
119        3          Ice Bolt
120        6          Frost Ray
121        9          Freezing Sphere
122        2          Summon Familiar
123        12         Summon Earth Elemental
124        20         Inferno Glyph
125        10         Thunder Glyph
126        15         Ice Glyph
127        10         Web
130        23         Mass Protection
131        18         Flaming Arrows
132        23         Chain Lightning
133        30         Globe of Protection II
134        25         Siryx's Terrible Tentacles
135        24         Storm Blade
136        19         Inferno Blade
137        22         Winter Blade
138        31         Energy Maelstrom
139        20         Sorcerous Summons I
140        35         Sorcerous Summons II
141        17         Pyrotechnics
144        28         Tindarath's Chaotic Summons

200        1          Fear
201        3          Charm
202        4          Enchantment I
203        15         Enchantment II
204        30         Enchantment III
205        6          Command
206        12         Domination I
207        4          Strength I
208        8          Strength II
209        16         Strength III
210        5          Haste
211        5          Slow
212        25         Mass Invisibility
213        17         Bend Space I
214        24         Domination II
215        10         Scry
216        2          Slumber I
217        6          Slumber II
218        18         Slumber III
219        7          Silence
220        1          Dancing Blade
221        6          Dancing Sword
222        23         Bend Space II
224        11         Fly
225        14         Invisibility
226        3          Paranoia
227        13         Imprisonment Rune
228        7          Identify
229        9          Wizard's Armor
230        21         Disjunction
231        19         Imprison
232        20         Mist Form
234        13         Spell Shield
235        22         Cloak Mind
243        26         Charge Wand
244        31         Enchant an Item
245        13         Slime Form
246        29         Yshtarin's Counfounding Translocation
248        34         Phantom Form      


301        2          Turn Undead I                 
302        8          Turn Undead II
           16         Turn Undead III                
303        11         Cure Poison                   
305        14         Breath of Life                
306        6          Animate Skeleton              
307        10         Animate Zombie                
308        7          Control Undead I              
309        13         Control Undead II
           21         Control Undead III             
311        3          Speak With Dead               
313        1          Body Destruction I            
314        5          Body Destruction II           
315        10         Body Destruction III          
316        1          Body Restoration I            
317        5          Body Restoration II           
318        10         Body Restoration III      
319        12         Cure Disease                  
323        3          Spectral Fist                 
326        9          Spectral Shield               
334        2          Invigoration I                
335        9          Invigoration II               
337        4          Reconstruction                
338        9          Unstun                        
339        3          Destroy Undead I              
340        8          Destroy Undead II             
341        13         Destroy Undead III            
345        7          Spectral Sword                
347        10         Divine Blessing   
           17         Wight Animation
           16-18      Wail of the Banshee
           20         Poison
           23         Contagion    
           23         Wither Limb 
           25         Symbol of Death
           27         Regeneration         
353        32         Summon Spectral Warrior
                       
400        1          Detect Magic                  
401        5          Dispel Lesser Magic           
403        9          Mindlink                      
404        14         Aura Sense                    
405        3          See Hidden                    
406        8          Dispel Invisibility           
407        3          Analyze Ore                   
408        18         Truename    
412        9          Bloodsight
                  
500        4          Plant Snare                   
501        23         Call Storm                    
502        19         Disperse Storm                
503        17         Call Lightning                
504        1          Call Animal                   
505        9          Freedom                       
506        3          Resist Weather                
507        7          Heat Shield                   
508        6          Cold Shield                   
509        10         Repel Plants                  
510        18         Repel Plants and Webs         
511        8          Carapace                      
512        15         True Aim                      
513        4          Agility I                     
514        11         Agility II                    
515        16         Agility III                   
516        14         Wall of Thorns                
517        5          Stick to Snake                
518        2          Claw Growth                   
519        13         Sunray         
520        1          Night Vision                  
521        7          Camouflage                    
522        25         Insect Swarm                  
523        5          Earth Spike                   
524        12         Earth Wave                    
526        22         Creeping Death                
528        20         Free Action                   
531        10         Tree Door                     
532        24         Ride the Lightning            
533        27         Commune with Nature
534        21         Claws of the Elder Wolf       
535        18         Form Lock 
           28?        Wolf Form                                          
