Well here is my take on weaponsmithing, (remember you asked) and this is merely based on smithing for the last 2 years, and speaking with Morthain. The comments I am about to make have no real proof and should merely be taken as heresay (as should anything that I say)... 
I will walk you step by step through all the aspects of smithing.. 
The Ore. Well for a long long time, players were really intersted in the 'purity;' of ore. When buying a piece of metal or ore, the player always wanted stuff that was '90 percent pure'. The purity, BTW, can be checked with the 'analyse ore' spell, or with a miners hammer. However, it became obvious that purity only plays one important role, and that is the chance of successfully smelting the ore. A '3 percent' ore is probably not gonna smelt, a '75 percent' ore will, the smithing level of the smith who smelts the ore also plays a role in this. 
The Metal. The metal, once smelted from ore, has 3 very important traits. 1) fiery/icy, this tells you what type of crit your gonna get, either 'none' 'cold' or 'fire' 2) metal type (ie randar, elkyri, steel), this ultimately determines the 'breakage' of the weapon, and some beleive it plays a role in determining crits, as well, though I dont beleive it. and 3) The 'color'. The color trait, was, until recently, a mystery, but now, through the use of a 'crucible' a person can determine the 'color' of his/her metal. Currently a miner is able to haul ores out of the ground that are either 'purple', 'indigo' or 'blue'. Now this 'color' I refer to is not visible by the naked eye, it only comes known when you stick the metal in a crucible and heat it up, the crucible will then emmit one of the 3 above mentioned colors. 
The Color. The color scale ranges from 1-10, purple being a (1) and the worse, and white hot being a (10) and the best. Also note, that there is no current method of mining anything higher than a (3)blue metal, it is just not in the game code, so you can get yourself 5 million levels of mining, and your still gonna get blue at best. Now what does this color mean? Well, it means one important thing, it determines the maximum sharpness of the weapon you can craft from that metal. It is a popular belief that purple metals rank from 1-5, ingigo 6-10, and blue 11-15, though I have no idea if this is true or not. These numbers are merely the 'base' sharpness, after this the 'skill' or the smith is added in, well not really the skill, but rather a random number, thought to be between -5 and 15. So if you have a piece of blue metal, first a random number between 11 and 15 is generated, and then a random number, which is commonly thought to be between -5 and 15 is generated, add the two together, (lets say its (12) and (6), so we get a (18)). This new number is the 'upper' maximum sharpness of the metal, so now a random number between 1 and 18 is generated, and tada! you have a +4 weapon! That should explain why people get such dull weapons. The above forumla, is something that I have derived via inference, kinda like watching an apple drop, and gauging a formula for gravity, so its properly wrong. But I think I am close to the truth. 
The Crits. Now as for the crits, well, this is almost soley based on the skill of the weaponsmith. Basically, the more levels of smithing you have, the higher your maximum crit will be. With 30 smithing, you will probably seen crits to a max of maybe 30, while with 100, you might see crits to a maximum of 100. The frequency of the crits, well, that is random, a weapon can crit either 5,4,3 out of 10 hits, with 5 being preferred. 
The Conclusion. Smithing is based almost totally on random factors, with the exception of the maximum crits. And due to the fact that GMs are enforcing a upper limit on crits, it becomes increasingly less useful to have a smithing rank over 70 or so. Another point of interest, the higher the color of the metal, the more skill that is required to work it. In the future, if miners are able to find metal of colors higher than 3, it would be a benifit to have more smithing ranks. I know that at rank 80, I was able to work both 4 and 5 color metals (a player had purchased them at an auction), but to work something like a 10 color metal, it requires a tremendous amount of skill. This might be one incentive to learning alot of smithing, so that one could work the higher grade metals. 
Well I have babbled far too long, just one final note, the above is all based on conjecture, and as such, should be taken with skepicism. 
Michael 

Well, by now, most of you have met me and are sending me your special orders and questions, hate mail, etc., but just in case -- until further notice, send special orders/requests to kahlua@novalink.com. I *will* reply to you as soon as I get your mail, and I *will* have your special orders to you within 3 days of receiving it. Answers to questions/requests may take a little longer, but I promise to at least keep you posted on what's happening. 
Second order of business -- I'm trying to update the crafters list and the master crafters' list on the newsboard. In order to help me out, would you please PLEASE email me with your crafter name and rank by Friday. 
That's pretty much it for now... 
